In the last section.
We continue to talk a little bit about images, but we're still surprisingly light on some of the details
around exactly what a container is.
So in this section, I'm going to give you a behind the scenes look at what a container is and how it
is created on your machine.
Now, to understand a container, you first need to have a little bit of background on exactly how your
operating system runs on your computer.
So I'm going to first give you a quick overview of your operating system.
Okay.
So this is a quick overview of the operating system on your computer.
Most operating systems have something called a kernel.
This kernel is a running software process that governs access between all the programs that are running
on your computer and all the physical hardware that is connected to your computer as well.
So if you're at the top of this diagram, we have different programs that your computer is running,
such as Chrome or Terminal Spotify or Node.js.
If you've ever made use of Node.js before and you've written a file to the hard drive, it's technically
not Node.js that is speaking directly to the physical device.
Instead, Node.js says to your kernel, Hey, I want to write a file to the hard drive.
The kernel then takes that information and eventually persists it to the hard disk.
So the kernel is always kind of this intermediate layer that governs access between these programs and
your actual hard drive.
The other important thing to understand here is that these running programs interact with the kernel
through things called system calls.
These are essentially like function invocations.
The kernel exposes different endpoints to say, Hey, if you want to write a file to the hard drive,
call this endpoint or this function right here.
It takes some amount of information and then that information will be eventually written to the hard
disk or memory or whatever else is required.
Now thinking about this entire system right here, I want to pose a kind of hypothetical situation to
you.
I want you to imagine for just a second that you and I have two programs running on our computer.
Maybe one of them is Chrome, like Chrome, the web browser, and the other is Node.js, the JavaScript
server side runtime.
I want you to imagine that we're in a crazy world where Chrome, in order to work properly, has to
have Python version two installed and Node.js has to have version three installed.
However, on our hard disk, we only have access to Python version two.
And for whatever crazy reason, we are not allowed to have two identical installations of Python at
the same time.
So as it stands right now, Chrome would work properly because it has access to version two, but Node.js
would not because we do not have a version or a copy of Python version three.
Again, this is a completely make believe situation.
I just want you to kind of consider this for a second, because this is kind of leading into what a
container is.
So how could we solve this issue?
Well, one way to do it would be used to make use of a operating system feature known as name spacing.
With name spacing, we can look at all of the different hardware resources connected to our computer,
and we can essentially segment out portions of those resources.
So we could create a segment of our hard disk specifically dedicated to housing Python version two.
And we could make a second segment specifically dedicated to housing Python version three.
Then to make sure that Chrome has access to this segment over here and Node.js has access to this segment
over here, any time that either them issues a system call to read information off the hard drive the
kernel will look at that incoming system call and try to figure out which process it is coming from.
So the kernel could say, okay, if Chrome is trying to read some information off the harddrive, I'm
going to direct that call over to this little segment of the hard disk over here, the segment that
has Python version two and Node.js.
Any time that makes a system call to read the hard drive, the kernel can redirect that over to this
segment for Python version three.
And so by making use of this kind of name spacing or segmenting feature, we can have the ability to
make sure that Chrome and Node.js are able to work on the same machine.
Now, again, in reality, neither of these actually needed installation of Python.
This is just a quick example.
So this entire process of kind of segmenting a hard or a hardware resource based on the process that
is asking for it is known as name spacing.
With name spacing, we are allowed to isolate resources per a process or a group of processes.
And we're essentially saying that any time a this particular process asks for a resource, we're going
to direct it to this one little specific area of the given piece of hardware.
Now, name spacing is not only used for hardware, it can be also used for software elements as well.
So for example, we can namespace a process to restrict the area of a hard drive that is available or
the network devices that are available, or the ability to talk to other processes or the ability to
see other processes.
These are all things that we can use name spacing for to essentially limit the resources or kind of
redirect requests for resources from a particular process.
Very closely related to this idea of name spacing is another feature called control groups.
A control group can be used to limit the amount of resources that a particular process can use.
So name spacing is for saying, Hey, this area of the hard drive is for this process.
A control group can be used to limit the amount of memory that a process can use, the amount of CPU,
the amount of hard drive, input input or input output, and the amount of network bandwidth as well.
So these two features put together can be used to really kind of isolate a single process and limit
the amount of resources it can talk to and the amount of bandwidth essentially that it can make use
of.
As you might imagine, this entire kind of little section right here, this entire vertical of a running
process, plus this little segment of a resource that it can talk to is what we refer to as a container.
And so when people say, Oh yeah, I have a Docker container, you really should not think of these
as being like a physical construct that exists inside of your computer.
Instead, a container is really a process or a set of processes that have a grouping of resources specifically
assigned to it.
And so this is a diagram that we're going to be looking at quite a bit.
Any time that we think about a container, we've got some running process that sends a system call to
a kernel.
The kernel is going to look at that incoming system call and direct it to a very specific portion of
the hard drive, the RAM, CPU or whatever else it might need.
And a portion of each of these resources is made available to that singular process.
Now, the last question you might have here is, och, well, I get what a container is, but with that
in mind, what is the real relation between one of those containers or that kind of singular, singular
process and grouping of resources to an image?
How is that single file eventually create this container?
That's a good question.
One more quick diagram.
Any time that we talk about an image, we're really talking about a file system snapshot.
So this is essentially kind of like a copy paste of a very specific set of directories or files.
And so we might have an image that contains just Chrome and Python.
An image will also contain a specific startup command.
So here's what happens behind the scenes when we take an image and turn it into a container.
First off, the kernel is going to isolate a little section of the harddrive and make it available to
just this container.
And so we can kind of imagine that after that little subset is created, the file snapshot inside the
image is taken and placed into that little segment of the hard drive.
And so now inside of this very specific grouping of resources, we've got a little section of the hard
drive that has just chrome and python installed and essentially nothing else.
The start up command is then executed, which we can kind of imagine in this case is like start up chrome,
just run chrome for me.
And so chrome is invoked.
We create a new instance of that process and that created process is then isolated to this set of resources
inside the container.
So that's pretty much it.
That is the relationship between a container and an image, and it's how an image is eventually taken
and turn into a running container.
Now there's still a tremendous amount more to learn about containers and images.
So let's take a quick break and continue in the next section.